# Safe Place For Youth Database Project Proposal

## Description

Safe Place for Youth is a 501(c)3 nonprofit seeking to automate their intake process for the homeless youth whom they serve. Currently, their staff must make the best of working with hard-copy forms and excel spreadsheets, manually recording and extracting client information and participation data each month to publish reports for donors and track the performance of their services. For this project, SPY is asking our development team to create a database-driven web application that will integrate with a pre-built database management system such as MySQL or Microsoft Access. They are looking for functionality that will make it easy for them to manage information for the youth via profiles as well as display and publish reports on their metrics to use for marketing and fundraising. 

Some of the most important features of the system will be the abilities to search, access, or enter information and documents about each individual youth (most likely via profiles). The system will allow case managers to track enrollment in programs, ongoing participation in those same programs, record and access case notes, and record specific dates and times for participation and services. Similar to LMU’s OrgSync environment, there will also be a dashboard for each of SPY’s services that will show which youth profiles are registered with certain services. It will also make large groups of people manageable with quick access to profile information, similar to PROWL or CommonApp.

The SPY staff, interns, and possibly volunteers are the end users for this application/system. The end result of the application should thus be as human friendly as possible, making it easy for new staff or interns to use it efficiently from their first day on the job.

In terms of platforms, SPY staff already use Mac laptops, and desktop PCs are also widely available to staff, interns, volunteers, and the youth. SPY is currently in the process of procuring a donated license to use Microsoft Access, the database management system they prefer using for the app. MS Access would couple with Microsoft OneDrive to take advantage of larger file storage capacities items such as scanned document images and photos.

Throughout the development of this project, we will create test code and documentation for individual components as well as the entire system, allowing for future developers to easily understand, test, and build on the product. Once the minimum viable product is delivered, we plan to continue working with SPY staff to resolve any issues that arise and implement additional features as requested. In addition, we will create training manuals and tutorial videos for new users or users who have difficulty navigating computers. Eventually, we plan to leave the system with enough documentation, guides, and stability such that the organization can maintain and build upon the product as they see fit.

## Justification
    
This project will apply and extend knowledge acquired in the LMU Computer Science curriculum. Skills acquired in the following classes will be utilized over the course of the semester: Interaction Design, Databases, Data Structures & Algorithms, Statistics, and Programming Languages. By building a visually appealing and easily communicative front end, we are applying our understanding of user interface design from Interaction Design. Safe Place for Youth is providing us with a disorganized database, which we must clean and synchronize our system with using our Databases and Data Structures & Algorithms knowledge. To build key performance indicators for each of the organization’s programs, we will use statistics. Lastly, all along the way we will be coding in both familiar and unfamiliar languages to test our skills acquired from Programming Languages.

Our deadline for the minimum viable product is October 15th. While that gives us only about a month to complete the minimum viable product, we feel that the length of time provided is doable, though it will be a challenge. This project will give us the chance to experience what it is like to work with a real-world deadline, with real clients that are expecting a product. We also will have the rest of the semester following the deadline to create additional features.  

To facilitate the development of the project, we divided our team into three sub-teams: front-end, back-end and database. Each sub-team is responsible for their portion of the project. A smaller team creates higher quality outcomes that are more efficient, thoughtful, and effective, as well as faster. When these sub-teams work well together as a unit they are able to accomplish more than the whole team working on same task. Also, a smaller group creates individuals ample opportunity to contribute.

The project will have significant impact on the productivity of the organization. As such, it will directly affect the lives of the staff and volunteers as well as the participating youth themselves. This assignment also allows us to utilize the skills and experience we have accumulated during our time as students to construct a product with real world applications. According to the programs manager for SPY, our system and the metrics it will provide will be directly linked to the amount of money they can acquire from donors. The chance to direct our studies towards making a noticeable difference in the lives of others is an exciting challenge and opportunity.

This project will also introduce many challenges. Specifically in terms of communication, knowledge acquisition and integration. We will need to be constantly updating our separate teams so we are in sync in terms of integrations. We will also be learning a couple new languages and frameworks in order to build the front-end and maintain the database.

